NE-530 ingress: global options to enable HSTS (#686)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/ingress/global-options-enable-hsts.md

## Proposal

Each goal is addressed in the subsections below.

#### Continue to enable HSTS per-route (retain the existing feature functionality)
The `Strict-Transport-Security` response header is currently applied per-route via an 
annotation called `haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header`.  This annotation has a
required directive `max-age`, and optional directives `includeSubDomains` and `preload`,
with the following definitions:
- `max-age`: delta time range in seconds during which the host is regarded as an HSTS host
    - If set to 0, it negates the effect and the host is no longer regarded as an HSTS host
    - `max-age` decrements over time
- `includeSubDomains`: if present, applies to any subdomains of the host's domain name
- `preload`: if present, tells the client to include this host in its host preload list so that 
it never needs to do an initial load to get the HSTS header (note that this is not defined in RFC 6797 
and is therefore client implementation-dependent)

HSTS is currently implemented as a pattern in the HAProxy template and applied to `edge` and 
`reencrypt` routes that match the `haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header` annotation:

> ````

Reviewer: I believe you want to use triple backticks for code fencing (as opposed to quadruple backticks).

Reviewer: Ah I guess this is true (just as long as the entire doc is consistent :grin: )

{{- /* hsts header in response: */}}
 {{- $hstsOptionalTokenPattern := `(?:includeSubDomains|preload)` }}
 {{- $hstsPattern := printf `(?:%[1]s[;])*max-age=(?:\d+|"\d+")(?:[;]%[1]s)*`  $hstsOptionalTokenPattern -}}
...
{{- if matchValues (print $cfg.TLSTermination) "edge" "reencrypt" }}
    {{- with $hsts := firstMatch $hstsPattern (index $cfg.Annotations "haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header") }}
  http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}}
    {{- end }}{{/* hsts header */}}
  {{- end }}{{/* is "edge" or "reencrypt" */}}
````
#### Enable HSTS for all routes globally
To add the header to all HTTP responses from an `edge` or `reencrypt` route, add a new router environment 

> variable called `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS`, configured by the administrator in the Ingress Operator.  `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS` is detected in the HAProxy configuration file processing, and can be overridden

Reviewer: > add a new router environment  variable called `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS`, configured by the administrator in the Ingress Operator

We need some sort of user-facing API so that a cluster administrator can tell the ingress operator to set the `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS` environment variable for an ingress controller's deployment. In general, we don't want cluster administrators manually modifying router deployments by hand.

I think it would make sense to add an option for requiring HSTS when possible to the Ingress Controller API. This would allow a cluster administrator to trivially enable "global" HSTS for individual ingress controllers, and would allow for different HSTS settings for different ingress controllers. How does that sound to you?

Reviewer: Yup, something along those lines id imagine.

`includeSubDomains` and `preload`.  An example of a properly formatted `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS` that expires after one year
and includes subdomains looks like:
````
max-age=31536000; includeSubDomains
````
With the addition of processing for `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS`, the code snippet above becomes:
````bash
{{- $router_global_hsts := env "ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS" "" }}
...
{{- if matchValues (print $cfg.TLSTermination) "edge" "reencrypt" }}
  {{- /* First check the environment to see if the header is set globally */}}
  {{- if (ne "" $router_global_hsts) }} 
    http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$router_global_hsts}}
  {{- end }}{{/* global_hsts */}}
  {{- /* Override if the annotation exists.  Set-header replaces any existing header */ }}
  {{- with $hsts := firstMatch $hstsPattern (index $cfg.Annotations "haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header") }}
    http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}}
  {{- end }}{{/* hsts header override per-route */}}
{{- end }}{{/* is "edge" or "reencrypt" */}}
````

#### Enable HSTS on a node-type basis (infra-only, worker-only, or both)

> (TBD) Clarification has been requested on this requirement.

Reviewer: Being able to enable HSTS on a per ingress controller basis may satisfy the customer's desire to be able to apply different HSTS settings for particular subsets of routes (ie routes that target workloads running on infra nodes, as long as all of those routes are served by the same ingress controller). Based on the [NE-310](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-310) epic description, I get the impression that the customer wants to be able to apply unique HSTS settings for the default ingress controller, but we should try to clarify what exactly their requirements are.

Author: In this case, they clarified that they would like it on a per-router basis.  I updated the doc for this case, can you ptal?

like this: 
````
http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}} if { isHSTSSubDomain req.hdr(host) }
````
The function `isHSTSSubDomain` would be specified to take a host name as input and return a boolean true
if the host name is part of a subdomain configured for HSTS, and false if not.  This may also require
a new field in `BackendConfig` to hold a list of subdomains to be configured for HSTS.  Details are TBD.

#### Disable HSTS per-route when it is enabled globally
As mentioned previously, the `Strict-Transport-Security` annotation called 
`haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header` has a required directive `max-age` that determines
its lifespan.  A per-route override on globally enabled HSTS can be indicated by setting the `max-age` 
value in the route's annotation to zero, as shown in this example:
```
metadata:
  annotations:
    haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header: max-age=0     
````

### User Stories

#### As a cluster administrator, I want to enable HSTS for all routes globally
Add an environment variable to the IngressController's deployment spec, for example, setting 

> `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS` to `max-age=31536000` 

Reviewer: I think there may be some trailing spaces in this section that are throwing lint errors in the link CI job.

- openshift/router
- openshift/cluster-ingress-operator (TBD)

### Risks and Mitigations
As previously mentioned, use of the `includeSubDomains` directive may cause problems unless the user
is aware of its encompassing implications.  To mitigate the risk of unexpected side effects, an analysis 
of the behavior of `includeSubDomains` will be performed and documented.

Additionally, the direction of overrides on global versus per-route HSTS annotations will be documented,
because it may not be clear to the user that a global setting cannot override a per-route setting.  Otherwise
it would not be possible to use a per-route setting.

## Design Details

### Open Questions
There are numerous TBD sections in this proposal.  It is currently a work in progress until further
clarification is received.

### Test Plan
HAProxy and Router have unit test coverage; for this enhancement, the unit tests are
expanded to cover the additional four goals.

The operator has end-to-end tests; for this enhancement, add the following tests:

1. Create an IngressController that enables global HSTS
2. Open a connection to this route and send a request.

> 3. Verify that a response is received and that the headers include HSTS

Reviewer: Perhaps an e2e test for this enhancement could also verify that HSTS can be disabled on a per route basis using an annotation as you mentioned.

  - "@sgreene570"

approvers:
  - "@frobware"
  - "@knobunc"

creation-date: 2021-03-08

last-updated: 2021-03-08

status: implementable

see-also:
  - https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1512759
  - https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1430035

replaces:

superseded-by:

---

# Global Options to Enable HTTP Strict Transport Security (HSTS)

This enhancement provides the capability to enable global automatic HSTS
as a default for all routes.

## Release Signoff Checklist

- [ ] Enhancement is `implementable`
- [ ] Design details are appropriately documented from clear requirements
- [ ] Test plan is defined
- [ ] Operational readiness criteria is defined
- [ ] Graduation criteria for dev preview, tech preview, GA
- [ ] User-facing documentation is created in [openshift-docs](https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/)

## Summary

In 3.x and 4.x customers can [provide a per-route annotation to enable HSTS](
https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.4/networking/routes/route-configuration.html#nw-enabling-hsts_route-configuration).  For
customers with many routes or regulatory compliance issues, the manual per-route annotation is
problematic.

> This enhancement extends the Route API to allow cluster administrators to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This enhancement extends the IngressController API to allow cluster administrators to
```

it never needs to do an initial load to get the HSTS header (note that this is not defined in RFC 6797
and is therefore client implementation-dependent)

HSTS is currently implemented as a pattern in the HAProxy template and applied to `edge` and
`reencrypt` routes that match the `haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header` annotation:
```gotemplate
{{- /* hsts header in response: */}}
 {{- $hstsOptionalTokenPattern := `(?:includeSubDomains|preload)` }}
 {{- $hstsPattern := printf `(?:%[1]s[;])*max-age=(?:\d+|"\d+")(?:[;]%[1]s)*`  $hstsOptionalTokenPattern -}}
...
{{- if matchValues (print $cfg.TLSTermination) "edge" "reencrypt" }}
    {{- with $hsts := firstMatch $hstsPattern (index $cfg.Annotations "haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header") }}
  http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}}
    {{- end }}{{/* hsts header */}}
  {{- end }}{{/* is "edge" or "reencrypt" */}}
```
#### Enable HSTS for all routes globally
To add the header to all HTTP responses from an `edge` or `reencrypt` route, add a new router environment
variable called `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS`.  To the `IngressController` custom resource definition API defined in

> `manifests/00-custom-resource-definition.yaml`, add a new `httpHeaders` property called `hstsHeaderPolicy` to

Reviewer: The canonical location of the IngressController API is https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types_ingress.go

the `spec`.  The `hstsHeaderPolicy` should contain the text directives that configure the header, where `max-age` is
required, and `includeSubDomains` and `preload` are optional.

`ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS` is detected in the HAProxy configuration file processing, and can be overridden
by any individual route's annotation.  The global `hstsHeaderPolicy` does not override an existing route
annotation for `haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header`

The `hstsHeaderPolicy` variable can be configured by the administrator in the `IngressController`, as shown in this example, where
the HSTS Policy expires after one year and includes subdomains:
```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
spec:
  httpHeaders:

>     hstsHeaderPolicy: "max-age=31536000;includeSubDomains"

Reviewer: We probably want to create a more formal API for specifying HSTS settings for an ingress controller. That way we could perform some validation on user-provided values, and ensure that all of the necessary fields are specified. The ingress-operator could then stringify the API fields into a string to be fed to the router pods via an environment variable (or maybe we could use multiple environment variables to do so). Thoughts?

Author: Agreed.  I was working on this today, and decided to leave this version as an alternative.

expanded to cover the additional four goals and the new `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS` environment variable propagation
from the `IngressController` to the router.

The operator has end-to-end tests; for this enhancement, add the following tests:

#### Enable global HSTS
1. Create an IngressController that enables global HSTS
2. Open a connection to this route and send a request
3. Verify that a response is received and that the headers include HSTS as configured in step 1

#### Override global HSTS on an individual route
1. Create an IngressController that enables global HSTS
2. Create a route that disables global HSTS with an annotation
3. Open a connection to this route and send a request
4. Verify that a response is received and that the headers do not include HSTS as configured in step 2

### Graduation Criteria
N/A

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy
On upgrade, any previous per-route HSTS configuration remains in effect.

If a cluster administrator applied any of the new HSTS configuration options
in 4.8, then downgraded to 4.7, the HSTS configuration settings would be ignored
except for the per-route HSTS configurations.  The administrator would be responsible

> for removing any per-route HSTS configurations that were no longer applicable.

Reviewer: Might be worth mentioning that an end-users browser, depending on the HSTS max-age setting, may still remember to access routes via HTTPS on downgrade (that is, until the HSTS record expires in the user's browser).

This enhancement extends the `IngressController` API to allow cluster administrators to
enable HSTS globally, without having to add an annotation to each route.

## Motivation

HSTS ([RFC 6797](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6797)) policy enforces the use
of HTTPS in client requests to the host, without having to use an HTTP redirect.
HSTS provides user protection and is concerned with minimizing security threats based on network
traffic eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle attacks.  Using a response header
called `Strict-Transport-Security`, the HTTP response informs clients that a website
can only be accessed via HTTPS.  

Administrators who are tasked with route management and/or regulatory compliance
issues want an option to automatically and globally enable HSTS. They also want
to separately apply HSTS globally to worker nodes and infrastructure nodes (e.g.
Prometheus, Grafana, web console hosts), while retaining the ability to opt-out
of HSTS on a per-route basis.

### Goals

This proposal allows administrators to:
- Continue to enable HSTS per-route (retain the existing feature functionality)
- Enable HSTS for all routes globally, based on the cluster's ingress domain

> - Enable HSTS per-router

Reviewer 2: Is it "per-router" or "per domain"?  This requirement is very confusing.

Reviewer: I interpreted the comments in https://issues.redhat.com/browse/NE-310 to suggest that enabling HSTS on a per-ingress controller level would be sufficient. Am I missing something? It's not clear to be if filtering out subdomains of an ingress controller's domain when assigning HSTS settings is strictly necessary to implement this RFE.

Author: I will change this to per domain, and rename the field from inScopeRouters to inScopeDomains.

They originally requested per-node application of HSTS, so that only infra and application nodes could be selected.  I believe we need to keep per-domain to help with that requirement.  If you think this adds too much to the scope of the EP, let me know and I will ask Marc and Mike if we can split off the work into another RFE.

Reviewer: I don't think this adds too much scope to this enhancement. I'm just not sure if I completely understand why being able to filter out domains for HSTS settings on an ingress controller is helpful. If a user wants to use different HSTS settings for 2 different sets of routes, they would have to have more than one ingress controller, right (and therefore, the scope settings in this enhancement wouldn't really be useful for them)? The scope fields proposed in this enhancement would give a user the ability to only enable HSTS in any capacity for a strict subset of routes served by a particular ingress controller, right (which i'm assuming is behavior we definitely want to implement)?

- Disable HSTS per-route when it is enabled globally

### Non-Goals

- HSTS cannot be applied to non-TLS routes, even if HSTS is requested for all routes globally.  As
mentioned in [RFC 6797 Section 8.1](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6797#section-8.1), if an HTTP
response is received over insecure transport, clients must ignore any present STS headers.
- The current implementation has a `preload` directive for the `Strict-Transport-Security`
header.  This is not an RFC 6797 directive and therefore its implementation may vary by

> browser.  It can be specified, but support may vary by implementation.

Reviewer 2: Is this a non-goal?  Looks like it belongs under "Risks and Mitigations" or "Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints".

## Proposal

Each goal is addressed in the subsections below.

### Continue to enable HSTS per-route (retain the existing feature functionality)
The `Strict-Transport-Security` response header is currently applied per-route via an
annotation called `haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header`.  This annotation has a
required directive `max-age`, and optional directives `includeSubDomains` and `preload`,
with the following definitions:
- `max-age`: delta time range in seconds during which the host is regarded as an HSTS host
  - If set to 0, it negates the effect and the host is no longer regarded as an HSTS host

>   - `max-age` decrements over time

Reviewer 2: The value that HAProxy sends doesn't decrement from one response to the next, does it?  Do you mean to say that `max-age` specifies a timeout period?

Author: Yes, the header specifies an HSTS Policy with a timeout included.  It is a time-to-live that the user agent must implement.  I will update this to make that clear.

 {{- $hstsOptionalTokenPattern := `(?:includeSubDomains|preload)` }}
 {{- $hstsPattern := printf `(?:%[1]s[;])*max-age=(?:\d+|"\d+")(?:[;]%[1]s)*`  $hstsOptionalTokenPattern -}}
...
{{- if matchValues (print $cfg.TLSTermination) "edge" "reencrypt" }}
    {{- with $hsts := firstMatch $hstsPattern (index $cfg.Annotations "haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header") }}
  http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}}
    {{- end }}{{/* hsts header */}}
  {{- end }}{{/* is "edge" or "reencrypt" */}}
```

#### Enable HSTS for all routes globally, based on the cluster's ingress domain
To add the header to all HTTP responses from an `edge` or `reencrypt` route, add a new router environment
variable called `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS`.

Add a new type `IngressControllerHSTSHeaderPolicy` to the API in
`openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types_ingress.go`, to capture the configuration of the HSTS Policy.
```go
type IngressControllerHSTSHeaderPolicy {
    // max-age is the delta time range in seconds during which the host is regarded as an HSTS host
	// If set to 0, it negates the effect and the host is no longer regarded as an HSTS host.
	// max-age` decrements over time.

>     // +required

Reviewer 2: The indentation is wonky here.

>     MaxAge             string `json:"max-age"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    MaxAge             metav1.Duration `json:"maxAge"`
```
or
```suggestion
    MaxAgeSeconds      int32 `json:"maxAgeSeconds"`
```

>     // scope indicates whether this header policy is enabled on a per-router basis (i.e. some
>     // routers will use HSTS and some will not) or it is global across every router in the cluster

Reviewer 2: I think the terminology is inaccurate here, but I may be misinterpreting.  How's this?
```suggestion
    // scope indicates whether this header policy is enabled for routes that have hosts with domains
    // in the list specified in inScopeRouters or for all routes that have hosts under the cluster
```

    // ingress domain.  If per-router HSTS configuration scope is desired, set the scope field to "limited".

>     // If global HSTS is desired, set the scope field to "all".  The default is "all".

Reviewer 2: Should there be an "off" value?  Hm, I guess `max-age: 0` is the "off" value?  I think it would be clearer to make `scope` a tri-state with off, limited, and all values.

Author: Let me think about that a bit.

    // +optional

>     Scope               string `json:"scope"`

Reviewer 2: Define a new string type that has a `+kubebuilder:validation:Enum` tag.  Search for "Enum" in this file for examples.

    // inScopeRouters is a list of router domains that require HSTS, when not all routers require HSTS.
    // If scope = all then this field is ignored.  If scope = limited, HSTS policy is limited to the routers
    // matching the domains in the inScopeRouters list.
    // +optional
    InScopeRouters      []string 'json:"inScopeRouters'

    // includeSubDomains means the HSTS Policy applies to any subdomains of the host's domain name
    // +optional
    IncludeSubDomains   bool `json:"includeSubDomains,omitempty"`

    // preload tells the client to include this host in its host preload list so that
    // it never needs to do an initial load to get the HSTS header (note that this is not defined
    // in RFC 6797 and is therefore client implementation-dependent).
    // +optional

>     Preload             bool `json:"preload,omitempty"`"`

Reviewer 2: I'm tempted to suggest making this a list of attributes:
```go
    additionalAttributes []hstsAttribute `json:"additionalAttributes,omitempty"`"`
    // ...
}

// hstsAttribute is an attribute that can be specified on HTTP Strict-Transport-Security headers.
// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=preload;includeSubDomains
type hstsAttribute string
```
What do you think?  Might want to check with someone with good taste and familiarity with API conventions.

Author: I felt wishy-washy that the three header components `max-age`, 'preload`, and 'includeSubDomains` did not belong in the same grouping as scope components `scope` and `inScopeDomains`, so I like the suggestion.  Maybe separating these into `headerDirectives` and `scopeAttributes`.  Would @deads2k be a good person to ask?

Author: Updated this to use a `hstsDirectives` list

	RouterHSTSHeaderScope        = "ROUTER_HSTS_SCOPE"
    ...
)
...
func desiredRouterDeployment(ci *operatorv1.IngressController, ingressControllerImage string, ingressConfig *configv1.Ingress, apiConfig *configv1.APIServer, networkConfig *configv1.Network, proxyNeeded bool) (*appsv1.Deployment, error) {
...
    if ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders != nil && ci.Spec.HTTPHeaderPolicy != nil && len(ci.Spec.HSTSHeaderPolicy.MaxAge) != 0 {
        header := "maxage=" + ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders.HSTSHeaderPolicy.MaxAge
        if ok := ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders.HSTSHeaderPolicy.IncludeSubdomains; ok != nil && ok {
        	header = header + ";includeSubdomains"
        }
        if  ok = ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders.HSTSHeaderPolicy.Preload; ok != nil && ok {
        	header = header +  ";preload"
        }
        env = append(env, corev1.EnvVar{Name: RouterHSTSHeaderPolicy, Value: header})
        scope = ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders.HSTSHeaderPolicy.Scope
        if scope == "limited" { // more details on this later in the EP doc
            env = append(env, corev1.EnvVar{Name: RouterHSTSHeaderScope, Value: "limited"})
        } else {
            env = append(env, corev1.EnvVar{Name: RouterHSTSHeaderScope, Value: "all"})

>         }

Reviewer 2: Use `switch ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders.HSTSHeaderPolicy.Scope {`.

    }
...
```

We don't do any other header validation, but if needed it could go in here:
https://github.com/openshift/cluster-ingress-operator/blob/master/pkg/operator/controller/ingress/controller.go#L441

Accompanying unit and e2e test changes are added to exercise the new header.

With the addition of processing for `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS`, the code template snippet above becomes:
```gotemplate
{{- $router_global_hsts := env "ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS" "" }}
...
{{- if matchValues (print $cfg.TLSTermination) "edge" "reencrypt" }}

>   {{- /* First check the environment to see if the header is set globally */}}
>   {{- if (ne "" $router_global_hsts) }} 
>     http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$router_global_hsts}}
>   {{- end }}{{/* global_hsts */}}
>   {{- /* Override if the annotation exists.  Set-header replaces any existing header */ }}
>   {{- with $hsts := firstMatch $hstsPattern (index $cfg.Annotations "haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header") }}
>     http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}}
>   {{- end }}{{/* hsts header override per-route */}}

Reviewer 2: It would be preferable to avoid writing two `http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security` lines if both the global setting and the annotation are set:
```suggestion
  {{- with $hsts := firstMatch $hstsPattern (index $cfg.Annotations "haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header") $router_global_hsts }}
    http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}}
  {{- end }}
```

Author: I have updated the design to use a helper function for the HAproxy template, `hstsHeaderValue`.  Needed to revert the `enums` for scope, back to `string consts.`

```

#### Enable HSTS per-router
Some of the proposal for this goal is in the section above.  In order to allow the HAProxy template to add HSTS Headers to
a limited list of routers, it will use the previously mentioned field `InScopeRouters` in the `IngressControllerHSTSHeaderPolicy`
type.

The details on the processing for limited scope in `desiredRouterDeployment` are completed here.
Add one more environment variable, `ROUTER_HSTS_LIST`, which will contain the list of domains in `InScopeRouters`:
```go
	const RouterHSTSHeaderList        = "ROUTER_HSTS_LIST"

       if scope == "limited" {
            env = append(env, corev1.EnvVar{Name: RouterHSTSHeaderScope, Value: "limited"})
            env = append(env, corev1.EnvVar{Name: RouterHSTSHeaderList, Value: ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders.HSTSHeaderPolicy.InScopeRouters})
       }
```
As shown in this example, the HSTS Policy scope is for a limited list of two routers, expires after one year, includes
subdomains, and requests preload:
```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
spec:
  httpHeaders:
    hstsHeaderPolicy:

>       scope: all

Reviewer 2: The value for `scope` should be `limited` in this example, right?
```suggestion
      scope: limited
```

      inScopeRouters:
        - domainA
        - domainB
      max-age: 31536000
      includeSubDomains: true
      preload: true
```

With the addition of processing for `ROUTER_HSTS_SCOPE` of `limited`, and `ROUTER_HSTS_LIST`, the code template snippet
above becomes:
```gotemplate
{{- $router_hsts := env "ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS" "" }}
{{- $router_hsts_scope := env "ROUTER_HSTS_SCOPE" "" }}
{{- $router_hsts_list := env "ROUTER_HSTS_LIST" }}
...
{{- if matchValues (print $cfg.TLSTermination) "edge" "reencrypt" }}
  {{- /* First check the environment to see if the header is set globally */}}
  {{- if (ne "" $router_hsts) }}
    {{- /* Now check the environment to see if scope is all, or limited but request domain is in the limited list */}}

>     {{- if or (eq "all" $router_hsts_scope) (and (eq "limited" $router_hsts_scope) (eq true (InList req.hdr(Host) $router_hsts_list)) )) }}

Reviewer 2: Everything inside the double-braces (`{{ ... }}`) is Go template, and `req.hdr` is an HAProxy configuration directive, so this will not work properly.  It may be necessary to write out a map file and define an acl (`acl hsts req.hdr(host),lower,map(/var/lib/haproxy/conf/os_hsts.map) -m found`) to use below (`http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$router_hsts}} if hsts`).

Author: I reworked this.

because it may not be clear to the user that a global setting cannot override a per-route setting.
Otherwise, it would not be possible to use a per-route setting.

## Design Details

### Open Questions
Version Skew Strategy - not clear to me if that is required here.

### Test Plan
HAProxy and Router have unit test coverage; for this enhancement, the unit tests are
expanded to cover the additional four goals and the new `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS` environment variable propagation
from the `IngressController` to the router.

The operator has end-to-end tests; for this enhancement, add the following tests:

#### Enable global HSTS
1. Create an IngressController that enables global HSTS
2. Open a connection to this route and send a request
3. Verify that a response is received and that the headers include HSTS as configured in step 1

#### Override global HSTS on an individual route
1. Create an IngressController that enables global HSTS
2. Create a route that disables global HSTS with an annotation
3. Open a connection to this route and send a request
4. Verify that a response is received and that the headers do not include HSTS as configured in step 2

> 

Reviewer 2: How about test coverage for `inScopeRouters`?

In 3.x and 4.x customers can [provide a per-route annotation to enable HSTS](
https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.4/networking/routes/route-configuration.html#nw-enabling-hsts_route-configuration).  For
customers with many routes or regulatory compliance issues, the manual per-route annotation is
problematic.

This enhancement extends the `IngressController` API to allow cluster administrators to
enable HSTS globally, without having to add an annotation to each route.

## Motivation

HSTS ([RFC 6797](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6797)) policy enforces the use
of HTTPS in client requests to the host, without having to use an HTTP redirect.
HSTS provides user protection and is concerned with minimizing security threats based on network
traffic eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle attacks.  Using a response header
called `Strict-Transport-Security`, the HTTP response informs clients that a website
can only be accessed via HTTPS.  

Administrators who are tasked with route management and/or regulatory compliance
issues want an option to automatically and globally enable HSTS. They also want
to separately apply HSTS globally to worker nodes and infrastructure nodes (e.g.

> Prometheus, Grafana, web console hosts), while retaining the ability to opt-out

Author: This is the Motivation section, so I was describing the requester's motivation.  I suppose that could be confusing.  I can tweak it while I'm making other changes.

- Enable HSTS for all routes globally, based on the cluster's ingress domain
- Enable HSTS per-domain
- Disable HSTS per-route when it is enabled globally

### Non-Goals

- HSTS cannot be applied to non-TLS routes, even if HSTS is requested for all routes globally.  As
mentioned in [RFC 6797 Section 8.1](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6797#section-8.1), if an HTTP
response is received over insecure transport, clients must ignore any present STS headers.

## Proposal

Each goal is addressed in the subsections below.

### Continue to enable HSTS per-route (retain the existing feature functionality)
The `Strict-Transport-Security` response header is currently applied per-route via an
annotation called `haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header`.  This annotation has a
required directive `max-age`, and optional directives `includeSubDomains` and `preload`,
with the following definitions:
- `max-age`: delta time range in seconds during which the host is to be regarded as an HSTS host
  - If set to 0, it negates the effect and the host is no longer regarded as an HSTS host
  - `maxAgeSeconds` is a time-to-live value, and if it is not refreshed, the HSTS policy for this host will

>   eventually expire

Author: I changed the comments so that scope is clearly opt-in, and reworked some of the code.

...
{{- if matchValues (print $cfg.TLSTermination) "edge" "reencrypt" }}
    {{- with $hsts := firstMatch $hstsPattern (index $cfg.Annotations "haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header") }}
  http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}}
    {{- end }}{{/* hsts header */}}
  {{- end }}{{/* is "edge" or "reencrypt" */}}
```

#### Enable HSTS for all routes globally, based on the cluster's ingress domain
To add the header to all HTTP responses from an `edge` or `reencrypt` route, add a new router environment
variable called `ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS`.

Add a new type `IngressControllerHSTSHeaderPolicy` to the API in
`openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types_ingress.go`, to capture the configuration of the HSTS Policy.
```go
// These are strings instead of enums so that they can be passed in easily from the HAProxy template
const (
    AllHSTSHeaderPolicyScope         = "All"
    LimitedHSTSHeaderPolicyScope     = "Limited"
)

// HSTSDirectiveType is an optional directive that directs HSTS Policy configuration.
//+kubebuilder:validation:Enum=preload;includeSubDomains
type HSTSDirectiveType string
const(

>     // PreloadHSTSDirective directs the client to include this host in its host preload list so that

Reviewer 2: The phrase "this host" doesn't work in this context as this is a global setting that applies to all hosts or to all hosts that match some domain in a list.  It probably isn't helpful to spell that all out here, so maybe just change "this host" to "hosts":
```suggestion
    // PreloadHSTSDirective directs the client to include hosts in its host preload list so that
```

    // it never needs to do an initial load to get the HSTS header (note that this is not defined
    // in RFC 6797 and is therefore client implementation-dependent).
    PreloadHSTSDirective             HSTSDirectiveType = "preload"

    // IncludeSubDomainsHSTSDirective means the HSTS Policy applies to any subdomains of the host's domain name
    IncludeSubDomainsHSTSDirective   HSTSDirectiveType = "includeSubDomains"
)

type IngressControllerHSTSHeaderPolicy {

> 	// maxAgeSeconds is the delta time range in seconds during which the host is regarded as an HSTS host.
> 	// If set to 0, it negates the effect and the host is no longer regarded as an HSTS host.
> 	// maxAgeSeconds is a time-to-live value, and if it is not refreshed, the HSTS policy for this host
> 	// will eventually expire.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// maxAgeSeconds is the delta time range in seconds during which hosts are regarded as HSTS hosts.
	// If set to 0, it negates the effect and hosts are no longer regarded as HSTS hosts.
	// maxAgeSeconds is a time-to-live value, and if this policy is not refreshed on a client, the HSTS policy
	// will eventually expire on that client.
```

	// +required
    MaxAgeSeconds       int32 `json:"maxAgeSeconds"`

    // HSTSDirectives is a list of optional HSTS directives that direct HSTS Policy configuration.

>     HSTSDirectives      []HSTSDirectiveType `json:"hstsDirectives,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: You can specify that the items need to be unique using the following tag: 
```go
    // +kubebuilder:validation:UniqueItems=true
```

    // scope indicates whether this header policy is enabled for routes that have hosts with domains
    // in the list specified in inScopeDomains (limited scope) or for all routes that have hosts under the

>     // cluster ingress domain (all scope).  If global HSTS is desired, set the scope field to "all".  The

Reviewer: Would `All` scope enable the given HSTS settings for all of the routes served by the given Ingress Controller?

Author: Yes, it would add the HSTS header to all http responses for edge and reencrypt routes under the cluster ingress domain.  I added some more to clarify:

If HSTS is desired for all routes, set the scope field to "All". If HSTS is desired for only a limited set of routes, set the scope field to "Limited" and add a list of subdomains to the InScopeDomains field.

Reviewer: > Yes, it would add the HSTS header to all http responses for edge and reencrypt routes under the cluster ingress domain. I added some more to clarify:

What if an Ingress Controller is serving routes with hosts that aren't under the cluster's ingress domain? Would `all` exclude those routes?

Author: No, if scope is "All" then all routes will get the configured HSTS Policy header.  I re-wrote this, ptal.

Reviewer 2: It still says "for all routes that have hosts under the cluster ingress domain (all scope)".  Also, the second goal is, "Enable HSTS for all routes globally, based on the cluster's ingress domain".  I think in both cases that should be "all TLS routes" without any reference to the cluster's ingress domain, right?

Reviewer 2: Also, the heading "Enable HSTS for all routes globally, based on the cluster's ingress domain" should omit "based on the cluster's ingress domain" if "All" means includes hosts that aren't under the ingress domain.

Author: Fixed.

>     // default is "all".

Reviewer 2: We don't want to start enabling HSTS everywhere when a user upgrades a cluster, so either the default should be some new "None" value, or the default should be "Limited" (which effectively means "None" as `inScopeDomains` defaults to empty).

Author: You are right.  The default will be none if Scope is not specified.

>     // cluster ingress domain (all scope).  If global HSTS is desired, set the scope field to "all".  The
>     // default is "all".

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    // cluster ingress domain (all scope).  If global HSTS is desired, set the scope field to "All".  The
    // default is "All".
```

    // +optional
    Scope               string `json:"scope,omitempty"`

    // inScopeDomains is a list of router domains that require HSTS, when not all routes require HSTS.
    // If scope = All then this field is ignored.  If scope = Limited, HSTS policy is limited to the domains
    // in the inScopeDomains list.  If scope = All, this field is ignored.
    // +optional

>     InScopeDomains      []string 'json:"inScopeDomains,omitempty"'

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    InScopeDomains      []string `json:"inScopeDomains,omitempty"`
```

```gotemplate
{{- $router_global_hsts := env "ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS" "" }}
...
{{- if matchValues (print $cfg.TLSTermination) "edge" "reencrypt" }}
  {{- /* Get the HSTS header value using the default and the annotations in the cfg */ }}
  {{- with $hsts := hstsHeaderValue $router_global_hsts "" $cfg "" }}
    http-response set-header Strict-Transport-Security {{$hsts}}
  {{- end }}{{/* hstsHeaderValue */}}
{{- end }}{{/* is "edge" or "reencrypt" */}}
```

#### Enable HSTS per-domain
Some of the proposal for this goal is in the section above.  In order to allow the HAProxy template to add HSTS Headers to
a limited list of domains, it will use the previously mentioned field `InScopeDomains` in the `IngressControllerHSTSHeaderPolicy`
type.

The details on the processing for limited scope in `desiredRouterDeployment` are completed here.
Add one more environment variable, `ROUTER_HSTS_LIST`, which will contain the list of domains in `InScopeDomains`:
```go
	const RouterHSTSHeaderList        = "ROUTER_HSTS_LIST"

       if scope ==  LimitedHSTSHeaderPolicyScope {
            env = append(env, corev1.EnvVar{Name: RouterHSTSHeaderScope, Value: LimitedHSTSHeaderPolicyScope})

>             env = append(env, corev1.EnvVar{Name: RouterHSTSHeaderList, Value: ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders.HSTSHeaderPolicy.InScopeDomains})

Reviewer 2: Presumably you will need something like `strings.Join(ci.Spec.HTTPHeaders.HSTSHeaderPolicy.InScopeDomains, ";")` to be able to store it in an environment variable.

       }
```
As shown in this example, the HSTS Policy scope is for a limited list of two domains, expires after one year, includes
subdomains, and requests preload:
```yaml
apiVersion: operator.openshift.io/v1
kind: IngressController
metadata:
  name: default
  namespace: openshift-ingress-operator
spec:
  httpHeaders:
    hstsHeaderPolicy:
      scope: Limited
      inScopeDomains:
        - domainA
        - domainB
      maxAgeSeconds: 31536000
      hstsDirectives:
        - includeSubDomains
        - preload
```

With the addition of processing for `ROUTER_HSTS_SCOPE` of `limited`, and `ROUTER_HSTS_LIST`, the HAProxy template code
snippet above will gain a few new variables:
```gotemplate

> {{- $router_hsts := env "ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS" "" }}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{- $router_global_hsts := env "ROUTER_DEFAULT_HSTS" "" }}
```
Or rename `$router_global_hsts` everywhere else.

As mentioned previously, the `Strict-Transport-Security` annotation called
`haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header` has a required directive `max-age` that determines
its lifespan.  A per-route override on globally enabled HSTS can be indicated by setting the `max-age`
value in the route's annotation to zero, as shown in this example:
```yaml
metadata:
  annotations:
    haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header: max-age=0
```

The HAProxy template remains the same, and the promised new function `hstsHeaderValue` will be added:

```go
// If the override annotation string is set, return it - the annotation overrides the default
// Otherwise, if the scope is limited and the domain is in the list - return the default
// Finally, if the scope is all - return the default
// Otherwise, return the empty string
func hstsHeaderValue(default_header string, hsts_scope string, config ServiceAliasConfig, hsts_list []string) string {
    wantLimited := false

	if override, ok := config.Annotations["haproxy.router.openshift.io/hsts_header"]; ok {
        return override
    } else if hsts_scope == LimitedHSTSHeaderPolicyScope {
        for domain := range hsts_list{

>             if strings.Contains(config.Host, domain) {

Reviewer 2: It would be better to parse `ROUTER_HSTS_LIST` into a `sets.String` value in the template plugin setup when the router starts in order to avoid doing a lot of string manipulation or looping when generating `haproxy.config`, but we can work out those implementation details later on.  

Using the host from the `ServiceAliasConfig` is a terrific idea—much simpler than writing a map and using HAProxy acls.

Author: I'll keep it a semi-colon delimited string to be passed in as an env variable, and do the parsing in hstsHeaderValue.
Thanks for all your comments!

customers with many routes or regulatory compliance issues, the manual per-route annotation is
problematic.

This enhancement extends the `IngressController` API to allow cluster administrators to
enable HSTS globally, without having to add an annotation to each route.

## Motivation

HSTS ([RFC 6797](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6797)) policy enforces the use
of HTTPS in client requests to the host, without having to use an HTTP redirect.
HSTS provides user protection and is concerned with minimizing security threats based on network
traffic eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle attacks.  Using a response header
called `Strict-Transport-Security`, the HTTP response informs clients that a website
can only be accessed via HTTPS.  

Administrators who are tasked with route management and/or regulatory compliance
issues want an option to automatically and globally enable HSTS. They also want
to separately apply HSTS globally to specific routers that target applications,
while retaining the ability to opt-out of HSTS on a per-route basis.

### Goals

This proposal allows administrators to:
- Continue to enable HSTS per-route (retain the existing feature functionality)

> - Enable HSTS for all routes globally, based on the cluster's ingress domain

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Enable HSTS for all TLS routes
```

    HSTSDirectives      []HSTSDirectiveType `json:"hstsDirectives,omitempty"`

    // scope indicates whether this header policy is enabled for a limited set of routes that have hosts
    // with domains in the list specified in inScopeDomains (limited scope) or for all routes that have
    // hosts under the cluster ingress domain (all scope).  If HSTS is desired for all routes, set the scope
    // field to "All". If HSTS is desired for only a limited set of routes, set the scope field to
    // "Limited" and add a list of subdomains to the InScopeDomains field.  If scope is omitted, no HSTS
    // header policy will be added.
    // +optional
    Scope               string `json:"scope,omitempty"`

    // inScopeDomains is a list of router domains that require HSTS, when not all routes require HSTS.
    // If scope = All then this field is ignored.  If scope = Limited, HSTS policy is limited to hosts with
    // domains in the inScopeDomains list.
    // +optional
    InScopeDomains      []string `json:"inScopeDomains,omitempty"`
}
```

Validation and formatting in the `IngressController`
would change the fields into a semi-colon delimited string with formatting:
```yaml

> max-age=<numberofseconds>[;includeSubDomains[;preload]]`

Reviewer 2: `preload` could be specified without `includeSubDomains`, right?
```suggestion
max-age=<numberofseconds>[;includeSubDomains][;preload]`
```
(That suggestion still isn't exactly right because the ordering doesn't really matter, but it's close enough.)
